Update public release name (#35)
camaraproject/ReleaseManagement: documentation/API_Release_Guidelines.md

## API releases - overview

In preparation of the public release of an API version, an API Sub Project can create as many alpha and release-candidate API versions as needed for API development and testing. 

The API Sub Project creates a release for an API version as follows:

* a pre-release may be created for an alpha API version.
* a pre-release must be created for each release-candidate API version.
* a public release must be created for an API version in order for it to be published as part of a meta-release.

Public releases can have an initial or stable status:

* An initial public release is the result of rapid development and can be
  * released and published at any time (outside the meta-release process) in order to allow for rapid evolution of APIs.
  * published as part of a meta-release. In this case, it is expected that in the next meta-release this public API version becomes stable.
* A stable public release is created only after its stability has been demonstrated through 
  * availability and use of the API in at least 1 commercial implementation.

>   * at least 1 certification of the API is provided on the [GSMA API market launch and certification page](https://www.gsma.com/solutions-and-impact/gsma-open-gateway/open-gateway-public-launch-status/).

Author: On the other changes: indeed, I missed discussing that as part of the PR during the meeting. We did have the discussion on whether one could publish outside of the meta-release (which we agreed should be possible) , but it was in another context I believe and not in the RM team. My bad and apologies.

I took the "expectation" part from the discussion, but you final proposal is much better, relating it to the current meta-release. 

Thanks Herbert !

Rest of the team please comment !

>   * at least 1 certification of the API is provided on the [GSMA API market launch and certification page](https://www.gsma.com/solutions-and-impact/gsma-open-gateway/open-gateway-public-launch-status/).

Author: Your above comment to refer to the checklist is in as well.

| Term | Definition |
|------|-------|
| pre-release | A pre-release is a GitHub release of an alpha or release-candidate API version. Note: the term release is also often used here but it should be clear from the context. (*) |

> | release | A release is a GitHub release of a public API version. Releases may be proposed as part of a meta-release.|

Reviewer: BTW: I have the impression that the term "release" is also used for the complete release cycle consisting of pre-releases and releases. But that does not harm, I suppose.

> | release | A release is a GitHub release of a public API version. Releases may be proposed as part of a meta-release.|

Author: yes, but indeed I think it is generally clear from the context.

> | release of an initial public API version | Initial public API versions only exist for new APIs. It concerns public APIs versions with x = 0 (0.y.z without version extension). |

Author: Agreed

> | release of a stable public API version | Stable public API versions are recommended for use in commercial applications. The user can expect that subsequent public API versions will be backward-compatible with the one they are using, unless explicitly announced otherwise.  |

Author: Agreed

| API release tracker | An API release tracker provides the visibility on the progress of the (pre-)releases of a given API version. Each public API version planned for release by an API Sub Project shall have its release tracker under their API Sub Project's API Release Tracking page. |

(*) NOTE: pre-releases are not meant to be included in a meta-release. All pre-releases are publicly available in the CAMARA GitHub and can be used AT THE USER'S OWN RISK, as changes may happen to such API versions without notice.

## API releases - overview

### Release process

To prepare the release of a public API version, API versions shall be (pre-)released as follows:

* before M3, release one or more alpha API versions as needed
* to reach M3, release the first release-candidate API version:
  * the release-candidate implements the scope of the target public API version.
  * this pre-release is agreed as ready for API implementation and functional testing.

>   * it is aligned with the release-candidate versions of Commonalities and ICM (M1).

Author: I thought the latest approach was, as for APIs, to have the (first) release-candidate for Comm. & ICM at M1 ? - Indeed the Wiki text is not up-to-date with that approach. Or do you want to keep the alpha release at M1 for Comm & ICM ?

>   * it is aligned with the release-candidate versions of Commonalities and ICM (M1).

Reviewer: My proposal would be to keep the milestones for the current meta-release cycle (Fall24) and therefore for the first version of the release process as currently described within the wiki. The reasoning is that it is also how we are currently delivering the milestones.

That will give us the time to prepare the change for the next release cycle, aligning it first with the working groups (as it would mean that they have to deliver the first release candidate for the Spring25 release mid of October).

>   * it is aligned with the release-candidate versions of Commonalities and ICM (M1).

Author: so if we retain the pre-release of alpha API version of Comm & ICM for M1, then instead of changing the sentence to refer to M2 (in your above proposal), the sentence should be:
* it is aligned with the alpha version of Commonalities and ICM (M1). 
correct ?

>   * it is aligned with the release-candidate versions of Commonalities and ICM (M1).

Reviewer: No, I thought about alignment with a release candidate of Commonalities and ICM. In this cycle the release candidates of Commonalities and ICM are late, so probably also the Sub Projects will have delays. Can we just omit the bracket for now and refer neither to M1 nor M2?

* between M3 and M4, release one or more release-candidate API versions as needed
* to reach M4, release the public API version:
  * this is the version ready for inclusion in the meta-release (if so planned).

>   * the public API version is aligned with the public versions of Commonalities and ICM (M2).

Author: How can the API be aligned with the latest release-candidate of Comm & ICM, and at the same time refer to the public version of the same ?
Do you mean that the CHANGE loge should refer to the target versions of Comm & ICM ?

>   * the public API version is aligned with the public versions of Commonalities and ICM (M2).

Reviewer: You are right, that's too complex written (my thought was: the alignment happens based on the release candidates, but in the public release any references or links have to go to the public versions.

Within the wiki we have described that the public versions of Commonalities and ICM will be created two weeks before M4 (not at M2). So my proposal is to keep the sentence, but omit the bracket with "(M2)".

| N/A | work-in-progress | N/A | N/A | N/A |
| pre-release | alpha | rx.1 ... rx.m | optional | optional: "pre-release" |
| pre-release | release-candidate | rx.m+1 ... rx.n | mandatory | "pre-release" |
| release | public | rx.n+1 | mandatory | "latest" |
| maintenance release | public | rx.n+2 ... rx.n+p | mandatory | "latest" |

## Releasing an API step by step

This section lists the steps to release an API version. More details can be found here: [API Release Process](https://wiki.camaraproject.org/x/AgAVAQ).

**Release preparation**

* Create a GitHub issue defining the scope of the targeted API version. Descriptive information in this issue can be reused in the changelog/release notes.
* Create the API release tracker for the target API version as describer here: [API release trackers](https://wiki.camaraproject.org/x/HQBFAQ).

**API version development**

On the main branch,
* develop the API scope in a "work-in-progress mode" (API version = wip and version in URL is vwip).
* make sure to create the required release assets and record them in the [API-Readiness-Checklist.md]() file

**Create the release PR**

Once the required stability is reached, create the release PR.

> A release PR provides only the following changes: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A (pre-)release PR provides only the following changes: 
```

> * update of the version information in the API OAS definition files (no "wip" in the version field or URL of any of the API files).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* update of the version information in the API OAS definition files (no "wip" in the version field and base URL of any of the API files).
```

> * update the [API-Readiness-Checklist.md]() ensuring all required release assets are available. If not yet available, create a local copy under the /documentation folder and prefix it with your API Sub Project name (Copy from [ReleaseManagement/documentation/API-Readiness-Checklist.md](https://github.com/camaraproject/ReleaseManagement/blob/main/documentation/API-Readiness-Checklist.md).

Reviewer: I understood that there should be one API-Readiness-Checklist per API:

```suggestion
* update the `API-Readiness-Checklist.md` ensuring all required release assets are available. If not yet available, create a local copy under the /documentation folder and prefix it with the respective API name (Copy from [ReleaseManagement/documentation/API-Readiness-Checklist.md](https://github.com/camaraproject/ReleaseManagement/blob/main/documentation/API-Readiness-Checklist.md).
```

> * update the [CHANGELOG.md]() in the home of the API repository. If not yet available, copy from [ReleaseManagement/documentation/CHANGELOG_TEMPLATE.md](https://github.com/camaraproject/ReleaseManagement/blob/main/documentation/CHANGELOG_TEMPLATE.md). See also the example available there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* update the `CHANGELOG.md` in the home of the API repository. If not yet available, copy from [ReleaseManagement/documentation/CHANGELOG_TEMPLATE.md](https://github.com/camaraproject/ReleaseManagement/blob/main/documentation/CHANGELOG_TEMPLATE.md). See also the example available there.
```

  * add a new section at the top for the release and each API version with the following content:
    * for each first alpha or release-candidate API version, all changes since the release of the previous public API version
    * for subsequent alpha or release-candidate API versions, the delta with respect to the previous pre-release
    * for a public API version, the consolidated changes since the release of the previous public API version

> * update of the [README.md]() (as necessary)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* update of the API repository`README.md` (as necessary)
```

**Create the release**
* manage the release PR approval
* merge the approved release PR
* create the release:
  * an API release is created using the GitHub release feature (a release tag and, optionally, a release package).
  * the release name shall be the same as the release tag and shall have the following format: rx.y

>   * the x.y number shall follow the release numbering scheme  as defined in the above section on API release numbering

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * the x.y number shall follow the release numbering scheme  as defined in the above section on API release numbering
  * the release description within the GitHub release should be a copy of the section about the release within the CHANGELOG.md
```

>   * note: outside the API Sub Project, the release name shall be referred to with the API name (for definition see the versioning section in the [API Design Guidelines](https://github.com/camaraproject/Commonalities/blob/main/documentation/API-design-guidelines.md)) followed by the release number e.g. quality-on-demand rx.y

Reviewer: Not sure if we need this line here.

Author: You mean the line 136 ? on naming outside the project ? fine with me. (I did not put it)

Reviewer: Yes, the suggestion is to delete line 136 from the document as it is a) out of scope and b) we can anyway not steer how the releases / API version will be referred "outside" 

(btw: the same sentence is in the wiki, but I haven't put it there either).

Author: Line 136 is now removed

* update the API release tracker with the date and release tag link for the release

**Maintenance release**

In case a patch update of a public API version x.y.z is required, the patched public API version x.y.z+1 shall be created through a maintenance release on a separate branch referred to as a maintenance branch. 

NOTE: a patch is the only case for which a separate branch is created and maintained within the API repository (as pull requests should be prepared within forks of the API repository, c.f. [Governance/CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/camaraproject/Governance/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md))

## Example of the API release process

To release a MINOR update of a public API version 1.0.0, resulting in the release of public API version 1.1.0:

* Develop the 1.1.0 updates on the main branch. The first PR shall update the OAS file setting the API version to wip, and the URL to vwip.
* Once sufficiently stable, create a release PR for the API version 1.1.0-alpha.1.
* After release PR approval, create the pre-release rx.1 and publish it on the API release tracker.

> * Several alpha API versions 1.1.0-alpha.p may be released, each setting the API version back to "wip" in the first API update PR and evolving the alpha number with each following pre-release (rx.2 - rx.m).

Reviewer: "Several" sounds a lot. And not the API is setting the API version back to "wip" ...

```suggestion
* Additional alpha API versions 1.1.0-alpha.p may be released. For each setting the API version back to "wip" in the first API update PR and setting the new version API only within the pre-release. Evolving the alpha number with each following pre-release (rx.2 - rx.m).
```

> * When the API version is ready, create a release PR for the API version 1.1.0-rc.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When the API version scope is complete, create a release PR for the release-candidate API version 1.1.0-rc.1
```

> * Several release-candidate API versions 1.1.0-rc.q may be released, each setting the API version back to "wip" in the first API update PR and evolving the rc number with each following pre-release (rx.m+1 - rx.n).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Additional release-candidate API versions 1.1.0-rc.q may be released. For each setting the API version back to "wip" in the first API update PR and and setting the new version API only within the pre-release. Evolving the rc number with each following pre-release (rx.m+1 - rx.n).
```
